DOCS-1357: Update changelog (#2235)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/appendix/changelog.md

# SME:
---

## October 2023

### Added: Test an ML model in browser

After you upload and train a machine learning model, you can test its results in the **Data** tab.

This allows you to refine models by iteratively tagging more images for training based on observed performance.

For more information, see [Test classification models with existing images in the cloud](/services/vision/classification/#existing-images-in-the-cloud).

> To use this update, the classifier must have been trained or uploaded after September 19 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this update, the classifier must have been trained or uploaded after September 19, 2023.
```

### Added: Mobile app

You can use a [mobile application](/manage/fleet/#the-viam-mobile-app), available for download now in the [Apple](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/viam-robotics/id6451424162) and [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.viam.viammobile&hl=en&gl=US) app stores, to connect to and control your Viam-powered machines directly from your mobile device.

### Added: Power sensor component

You now have the capability to use a [power sensor component](/components/power-sensor/) to monitor the voltage, current, and power consumption within your machine's system.

### Added: Filter component's data before the cloud

Viam has written a module that allows you to filter data based on specific criteria before syncing it to [Viam's cloud](/services/data/#cloud-sync).
It equips machines to:

- Remove data that is not of interest
- Facilitate high-interval captures while saving data based on your defined metrics
- Prevent the upload of unnecessary data

To learn more, see [this tutorial](/tutorials/configure/pet-photographer/) on creating and configuring a data filtration module.

## August 2023

### Added: Configure a customlinux board

> You can now upload Linux board definitions more efficiently.
> 
> With the `board` command, you can:
> 
> - Use the `viam board upload` command to upload a board definition file
> - Specify the board's name, organization, version, and the path to the JSOn file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now use boards like the [Mediatek Genio 500 Pumpkin](https://ologicinc.com/portfolio/mediateki500/) that run Linux operating systems with the [`customlinux` board model](/components/board/customlinux/).
```

- Adjust any attributes, such as motor pin numbers

## July 2023

### Added: Apple SSO Authentication

Viam now supports sign-up/log-in through Apple Single Sign-On.

Note that currently, accounts from different SSO providers are treated separately, with no account merging functionality.

### Improved: Arm component API

Arm models now support the [`GetKinematics` method](/components/arm/#getkinematics) in the arm API, allowing you to request and receive kinematic information.

## June 2023

### Added: View sensor data within Viam

You can now [view your sensor data](https://app.viam.com/data/view?view=sensors) directly in the Viam app to verify data creation and accuracy.
If you depend on sensor data to plan and control robot operations, this feature increases access to data and supports a more efficient workflow.

### Added: Session management in the Python SDK

The Python SDK now includes sessions, a safety feature that automatically cancels operations if the client loses connection to your robot.

[Session management](/program/apis/sessions/) helps you to ensure safer operation of your robot when dealing with actuating controls.

> Sessions are enabled by default, with the option to disable [them](/program/apis/sessions/#disable-default-session-management).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sessions are enabled by default, with the option to [disable sessions](/program/apis/sessions/#disable-default-session-management).
```

# SME:
---

## October 2023

### Added: Test an ML model in browser

Now, after you upload and train your machine learning model, you can test its results in the **Data** tab.

> With this feature you can now:
> 
> - Select an image in the **Data** tab and access the **run model** section to choose and run a model
> - View the results directly above the image
> - Refine models by iteratively tagging more images for training based on observed performance
> 
> To use this update, the classifier must have been trained or uploaded after September 19 2023.
> Additionally, the current version of this feature exclusively supports classification models.

Reviewer: This is good but duplicates information that may change in the future, so I think it's best to link to the docs which should always be up to date:

```suggestion
This allows you to refine models by iteratively tagging more images for training based on observed performance.

For more information, see [Test classification models with existing images in the cloud](/services/vision/classification/#existing-images-in-the-cloud).

To use this update, the classifier must have been trained or uploaded after September 19 2023.
The current version of this feature exclusively supports classification models.
```

## Added: PLC support

> Support for the [Revolution Pi line of PLCs](https://revolutionpi.com/) from KUNBUS has been integrated into the Viam platform in the form of a module.

Reviewer: A good find - just removing passive voice
```suggestion
The viam platform now supports the [Revolution Pi line of PLCs](https://revolutionpi.com/) from KUNBUS in the form of a module.
```

This collaboration allows you to leverage the Raspberry Pi-based Revolution Pi, which runs on Linux and has a [specially designed I/O modules](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/compute-module-4/?variant=raspberry-pi-cm4001000) for streamlined interaction with industrial controls, eliminating the need for additional components.

> Read the blog post for a step-by-step guide on using a PLC with Viam.

Reviewer: which blog post? We're also missing a link to the module.

### Improved: SLAM map creation

The [Cartographer-module](/services/slam/cartographer/) now runs in Viam's cloud for creating or updating maps.
This enhancement allows you to:

- Generate larger maps without encountering session timeouts
- Provide IMU input to improve map quality
- Save maps to the **SLAM library** tab
- Create or update maps using previously captured LiDAR and IMU data
- Deploy maps to machines

## September 2023

### Added: Modular registry

> The Modular Registry enables you to use, create, and share custom modules, extending the capabilities of Viam beyond the components and services that are natively supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Modular Registry](/registry) enables you to use, create, and share custom modules, extending the capabilities of Viam beyond the components and services that are natively supported.
```

> This new feature allows you to:

Reviewer: This is a bit bigger than a feature :)
```suggestion
You can:
```

- Publish modules on the registry
- Add modules to any machine's configuration with a few clicks
- Select the desired module version for deployment, make changes at your convenience, and deploy the updates to a single machine or an entire fleet.

### Added: Mobile app

> Now, you can use a mobile application, available for download now in the [Apple](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/viam-robotics/id6451424162) and [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.viam.viammobile&hl=en&gl=US) app stores, to connect to and control your Viam-powered machines directly from your mobile device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a [mobile application](/manage/fleet/#the-viam-mobile-app) to connect to and control your Viam-powered machines directly from your mobile device.
The mobile application is available for download in the [Apple](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/viam-robotics/id6451424162) and [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.viam.viammobile&hl=en&gl=US) app stores.
```

### Added: Power sensor component

> You now have the capability to use a power sensor component to monitor the voltage, current, and power consumption within your machine's system.
> 
> To integrate your power sensor into Viam, you can [configure a module](/registry/configure/), or select from the following supported models:
> 
> - [INA219](/components/power-sensor/ina219/)
> - [INA226](/components/power-sensor/ina226/)
> - [Renogy](/components/power-sensor/renogy/)

Reviewer: this is good but could go out of date and cause people to think we don't support some models that we may have added by the time they read this. Better to just link to the docs:

```suggestion
You now have the capability to use a [power sensor component](/components/power-sensor/) to monitor the voltage, current, and power consumption within your machine's system.
```

### Added: Filter component's data before the cloud

> This update allows you to filter data based on specific criteria before syncing it to [Viam's cloud](/services/data/#cloud-sync).

Reviewer: This isn't really a platform capability / update so we need to word this a bit differently.
```suggestion
Viam has written a module that allows you to filter data based on specific criteria before syncing it to [Viam's cloud](/services/data/#cloud-sync).
```

It equips machines to:

- Remove data that is not of interest
- Facilitate high-interval captures while saving data based on your defined metrics
- Prevent the upload of unnecessary data

To learn more, see [this tutorial](/tutorials/configure/pet-photographer/) on creating and configuring a data filtration module.

## August 2023

> ### Added: Board command added to the CLI

Reviewer: I think this may actually be too small to warrant including here. I think what is important though is the addition of the customlinux model https://docs.viam.com/components/board/customlinux/ - so you can change it to that :)

> You can now upload manage Linux board definitions more efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now upload Linux board definitions more efficiently.
```

With the `board` command, you can:

- Use the `viam board upload` command to upload a board definition file
- Specify the board's name, organization, version, and the path to the JSOn file

### Added: Image inspection for ML training

This update enables you to get a closer examination of your image and streamline your image annotation experience by making it easier to add bounding boxes and labels in the **Data** tab.

With the latest improvements, you can now:

- Navigate between images using the arrow keys in the main image view
- Expand images for a more detailed inspection by clicking the expand button on the right image panel
- Move between full-screen images effortlessly with the <> arrow buttons or arrow keys
- Return to the standard view by using the escape key or collapse button

> ### Added: Duplicate component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Added: Duplicate component button
```

> You now have the ability to duplicate any config component, service, module, remote, or process.
> This functionality enables the duplication of any configured component and simplifies the process of creating identical configurations for resources.

Reviewer: you're saying the same thing twice - I think we can merge this
```suggestion
You now have the ability to duplicate any configured component, service, module, remote, or process.
```

To use this feature:

- Click on the duplicate component icon at the top right of any resource
- Optionally, you can modify the component name to distinguish it
- Adjust any attributes, such as motor pin numbers

## July 2023

### Added: Apple SSO Authentication

Viam now supports sign-up/log-in through Apple Single Sign-On.

Note that currently, accounts from different SSO providers are treated separately, with no account merging functionality.

> ### Added: Viam VS Code Extension
> 
> There is now a Visual Studio Code extension for Viam that offers a set of code snippets, streamlining the process of building robot applications by providing predefined code for common tasks.

Reviewer: Careful - this isn't Viam-owned, so not appropriate to feature in our change logs
```suggestion
```

### Improved: Arm component API

> You can now access a [`GetKinematics` method](https://github.com/viamrobotics/api/blob/main/proto/viam/common/v1/common.proto#L186-L203) in the arm API, allowing you to request and receive kinematic information.

Reviewer: let's link to the docs instead
```suggestion
Arm models now support the [`GetKinematics` method](/components/arm/#getkinematics), allowing you to request and receive kinematic information.
```

> With this update:
> 
> - Request kinematic information through the arm client
> - Receive kinematic information from arm implementations (modular arms)
> - Experience enhanced functionality through added tests

Reviewer: I think the above already says that mostly thoguht we can mention modular resources there if you like
```suggestion
```

## June 2023

### Added: View sensor data within Viam

You can now [view your sensor data](https://app.viam.com/data/view?view=sensors) directly in the Viam app to verify data creation and accuracy.
If you depend on sensor data to plan and control robot operations, this feature increases access to data and supports a more efficient workflow.

### Added: Session management in the Python SDK

The Python SDK now includes sessions, a safety feature that automatically cancels operations if the client loses connection to your robot.

> Session management helps you to ensure safer operation of your robot when dealing with actuating controls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Session management](https://docs.viam.com/program/apis/sessions/) helps you to ensure safer operation of your robot when dealing with actuating controls.
```

> Sessions are enabled by default, with the option to disable them by setting `RobotClient.Options.disable_sessions = True`.

Reviewer: Just in case that changes!
```suggestion
Sessions are enabled by default, with the option to [disable them](/program/apis/sessions/#disable-default-session-management).
```

### Added: Connect an ODrive motor controller as a Viam module

> You can integrate and control ODrive motor controllers with Viam using a Python modular resource.

Reviewer: I don't think it really matters which language it is in since you can use it with either SDK, so adding the language may cause unnecessary confusion
```suggestion
You can integrate and control ODrive motor controllers with Viam using a modular resource.
```

> This update comes with more options for setting up and controlling your robots' movement.

Reviewer: I don't know what this sentence is supposed to mean - think not needed
```suggestion
```

> Visit the[GitHub repository](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) to learn how to connect and use an ODrive motor controller with Viam, and view the sample configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visit the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) to learn how to connect and use an ODrive motor controller with Viam, and view the sample configurations.
```

### Added: Implement custom robotic arms as Viam modules

When prototyping a robotic arm, you can now facilitate movement without creating your own motion planning.
This update enables you to implement custom models of an arm component as a [modular resource](/registry/) by coding three endpoints of the [Arm API](/components/arm/#api):

- `getJointPositions`
- `movetoJointPositions`
- `GetKinematics`

> Then, use the motion planning service to specify poses, and Viam handles the rest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, use the [motion planning service](/services/motion/) to specify poses, and Viam handles the rest.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information see this [tutorial on creating a custom arm](/registry/examples/custom-arm/).

```

### Added: Apply a crop transform to camera views

You can now apply a [crop transform](/components/camera/transform) to the views of your connected cameras in the Viam app.

> This feature enables you to:
> 
> - Focus on a specific area of your camera feed (for example, crop a video stream of a busy street to just the sidewalk)
> - Export screenshots for further analysis

Reviewer: screenshots were already possible
```suggestion
This feature enables you to focus on a specific area of your camera feed.
For example, crop a video stream of a busy street to just the sidewalk.
```

### Improved: Gantry component

To better control gantries with Viam, you can now:

- Specify speed values when calling the `MovetoPosition` method on [Gantry components](/components/gantry/).
  This allows you to define the speed at which each axis moves to the desired position, providing enhanced precision and control over the gantry's movement.
- Set a home position for Gantry components to facilitate position resetting or maintain consistent starting points.

### Improved: Optimized Viam-trained object detection models

This update for object detection models [trained with the machine learning service](/manage/ml/train-model/) brings significant improvements, including:

- 76% faster model inference for camera streams
- 64% quicker model training for object detection
- 46% reduction in compressed model size

## May 2023

### Added: TypeScript SDK beta release

The beta release of the [TypeScript SDK](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-typescript-sdk/) allows you to create a web interface to work with your robot, as well as create custom components and services.

### Added: Train object detection ML models

> You now have the capability to directly train object detection models in addition to image classification models from within the Viam app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You now have the capability to directly [train object detection models](/manage/ml/train-model/) in addition to image classification models from within the Viam app.
```

This update allows you to:

> - Generate labels by drawing bounding boxes around specific objects in your images or a single image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add labels by drawing bounding boxes around specific objects in your images or a single image.
```

- Create a curated subset of data for training by filtering images based on labels or tags.

### Added: Permissions for organizations in Viam

Now when you invite collaborators to join your organization, you can assign permissions to members by setting one of these roles:

- **Owner**: These members can see and edit [every tab on the robot page](/manage/fleet/robots/#navigating-the-robot-page), as well as manage users in the app.
  This role is best for those on your team who are actively engineering and building robots.

- **Operator**: These members can only see and use the [remote control tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#control).
  This role is best for those on your team who are teleoperating or remotely controlling robots.

[Learn more here](/manage/fleet/) about assigning permissions and collaborating with others on Viam.

### Improved: Control RoboClaw motor controllers with the driver

> When using a RoboClaw motor controller without encoders connected to your motors, now have more direct control over the RoboClaw’s functionality within Viam or through the motor API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using a RoboClaw motor controller without encoders connected to your motors, you now have more direct control over the RoboClaw’s functionality within Viam or through the motor API.
```
